# **[vrrp](https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/computer-networks/introduction-of-virtual-router-redundancy-protocol-vrrp-and-its-configuration/)**

Introduction of Virtual Router Redundancy Protocol (VRRP) and its configuration
Last Updated : 22 Dec, 2022
VRRP is an open standard protocol, which is used to provide redundancy in a network. It is a network layer protocol (protocol number-112). The number of routers (group members) in a group acts as a virtual logical router which will be the default gateway of all the local hosts. If one router goes down, one of the other group members can take place for responsibility for forwarding the traffic.

A network layer protocol defines the rules for communication between devices across networks. These protocols handle routing and forwarding packets to their destination, ensuring data reaches the correct network and device. Key examples include IP (Internet Protocol), ARP (Address Resolution Protocol), and ICMP (Internet Control Message Protocol).

## Some important terms related to VRRP

**virtual IP address:** An IP address is assigned as a virtual IP address from the local subnet which is configured as a default gateway for all the local hosts.
**Virtual MAC address:** A virtual MAC address is automatically generated by taking the last 8 bytes as the VRRP group number in hexadecimal. In VRRP, Mac address used is 0000.5e00.01xx. Here, xx is the VRRP group number in hexadecimal.
**Master router:** One of the VRRP group member is elected as master router which takes up the responsibility of forwarding the local traffic. The router is elected on the basis of priority. If some group member of VRRP group has higher priority than others then it will be elected as master router. If the priority is same(by default 100) then the router having the highest IP address will become the master router.
**Backup routers:** Only one of the VRRP group member will become the master router while others will be back up routers. In case the master router fails then one of the backup routers will become master router.
**Master advertisement timer:** The master router multicast the keep-alive messages at 224.0.0.18 in every 1 second.

Multicast is a network communication method where a single data stream is transmitted to a specific group of recipients, rather than to all devices on the network (broadcast) or just one (unicast). It's efficient for scenarios like streaming video to multiple users or distributing software updates to a targeted set of devices.
